# A Brief Note on Technical Recruiting

There have been plenty of articles that expose how off the mark most technical recruiters are when sending out “cold” emails to prospective job candidates. On a daily basis, I receive a litany of these same old rehashed, boilerplate, cut-and-paste attempts at catching my attention. In some cases I find them to even be offensive in how little relevance their note has to myself and my experience. To all of you trigger happy recruiters, here's some advice if I was looking for work (note: which I am _not_):

*   Actually read the skills listed in my LinkedIn profile (if I get another .NET opportunity in my inbox, I'm going to go all Michael Douglas on your face... yes circa Falling Down).
*   Don't use the terms: ninja, rockstar, pixel perfect, or ground-floor.
*   Don't ask me to call you, I'm not ever going to use a phone to contact you. Email is fine.
*   Make sure you don't send the same exact lines to one of my friends or colleagues, we'll definitely share a sardonic laugh session over beers about that.
*   If I ignored your initial message, that wasn't a filtering error -- I'm not interested.

To be clear, I have worked with a small handful of terrific recruiters in the past both as a client and a candidate. Absolutely _none_ of them were a product of correspondence initiated from a cold email. Excuse the snark, I haven't had my coffee yet.

Required reading: [What technical recruiters can learn from online dating](http://www.nczonline.net/blog/2013/02/05/what-technical-recruiters-can-learn-from-online-dating/) by Nicholas Zakas.